gh-94017: Improve clarity of sqlite3 transaction handling docs (#94320)
python/cpython: Doc/library/sqlite3.rst

   .. attribute:: isolation_level

      Get or set the isolation level.
      Set to :const:`None` to disable implicit transaction handling,
      or to one of the ``"DEFERRED"``, ``"IMMEDIATE"``, or ``"EXCLUSIVE"``

>       transaction handling modes.

Author: There is one thing that still disturbs me with this part: it is not technically correct to say that DEFERRED, IMMEDIATE, and EXCLUSIVE are transaction handling modes; this may be percieved as if sqlite3 has four transaction handling modes (one for each allowed value). However, it has only two:

1. *isolation_level* is `None`: no implicit transaction handling is performed (except for the implicit commit in `executescript`)
2. *isolation_level* is a string: implicit transaction handling is performed (implicit BEGIN before INSERT, DELETE, etc., and of course the commit in executescript.)

Perhaps it is better to describe these as:

1. *isolation_level* is `None`: transactions are never implicitly opened
2. *isolation_level* is `str`: transactions are implicitly opened before INSERT, etc.

The three allowed string values relates to low level SQLite [transaction behaviour](https://www.sqlite.org/lang_transaction.html), but the *sqlite3* implicit transaction mode is the same, no matter the *SQLite* transaction *behaviour*.

I'm not sure how to best communicate these things, but we cannot land this PR yet :(

Author: I tried to address all of this in 1473e948d54b18755dcef8daf421e11f48d7ebf7.

   .. attribute:: isolation_level

>       Get or set the current default isolation level.

Reviewer: "current default" sounds somewhat confusing to me, as it seems a little oxymoronic. is there maybe another way to describe this that doesn't involve putting both those words together?

Author: Hah, I didn't notice that one until you pointed it out 😆 I think it survived from the original version.

Reviewer: Indeed it did :) —but I figured I'd mention it while you were at it.

Author: I just removed "current default". However, we might as well just remove the whole sentence. It does not add much value.

Author: I'll remove this first sentence. But I want to do some final adjustments on the `isolation_level` docs before landing this PR. Bear with me :)

      Set to :const:`None` to disable implicit transaction handling,

>       or one of "", "DEFERRED", "IMMEDIATE" or "EXCLUSIVE".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      or to one of the ``"DEFERRED"``, ``"IMMEDIATE"`` or ``"EXCLUSIVE"``
      transaction-handling modes.
```

Parallel the first clause of the sentence in stating the meaning of these values, and save the mention of the alias for `DEFERRED` until when the default is introduced, to avoid confusion. Also, use correct reST syntax.

      Defaults to the former (`""`), unless overridden at :func:`connect`,
      using the *isolation_level* parameter.

>       "" and "DEFERRED" carry the same meaning;
>       they both imply deferred isolation level.

Author: Feels weird to start a sentence with "".

```suggestion
      Both "" and "DEFERRED" carry the same meaning;
      they imply deferred isolation level.
```

>       Defaults to the former (`""`), unless overridden at :func:`connect`,
>       using the *isolation_level* parameter.
>       Both "" and "DEFERRED" carry the same meaning;
>       they imply deferred isolation level.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      If not overridden by the *isolation_level* parameter of :func:`connect`,
      the default is ``""``, which is an alias for ``"DEFERRED"``.
```

Say the same thing but more simply, directly and succinctly, and match the above. Also, fix reST syntax.

      See :ref:`sqlite3-controlling-transactions` for more details.

   .. attribute:: in_transaction

      This read-only attribute corresponds to the low-level SQLite autocommit

>       mode.

Reviewer: Here, we should either link to the section below that discusses it (if it does), or else directly to SQLite's own autocommit docs.

   .. attribute:: isolation_level

      This attribute controls the :ref:`transaction handling
      <sqlite3-controlling-transactions>` performed by ``sqlite3``.
      If set to :const:`None`, transactions are never implicitly opened.
      If set to one of ``"DEFERRED"``, ``"IMMEDIATE"``, or ``"EXCLUSIVE"``,

>       the strings representing the underlying SQLite `transaction behaviour`_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      corresponding to the underlying `SQLite transaction behaviour`_,
```

Clearer/cleaner phrasing and include SQLite in the link target, since it is a key part of the target's name

Author: +1

>       transactions are implicitly opened before some DML statements.

Reviewer: It seems this is the only use of the term "DML statement" in this document, and neither is it defined in the linked SQLite docs. I'm no database expert, though I have read most of these docs, but still had to go Google it myself and read through the linked resources to determine what statements were affected (with some ambiguity about `SELECT`).

Unless nearly all readers would be expected to know what it means and what statements (presumably `SELECT`, `INSERT`, `UPDATE` and `DELETE`) are included, I suggest explicitly specifying _which_ statements, and/or linking to a definition/explanation of the term.

Author: Hm, how about just simplifying it and linking to the explanation?

```suggestion
      some implicit :ref:`transaction management
      <sqlite3-controlling-transactions>` is performed.
```

Reviewer: Looks good overall, I just suggest eliding "some" since it is rather vaugue and confusing, and sounds strange in that context in English technical writing:

```suggestion
      implicit :ref:`transaction management
      <sqlite3-controlling-transactions>` is performed.
```

   .. method:: execute(sql[, parameters])

>       Execute an SQL statement. Values may be bound to the statement using

Reviewer: To note, this never seems to explicitly describe what `parameters` are or in what form they should be passed, though perhaps out of scope here.

Author: Lets do that in another PR.

   .. method:: execute(sql[, parameters])

      Execute an SQL statement. Values may be bound to the statement using
      :ref:`placeholders <sqlite3-placeholders>`.

      :meth:`execute` will only execute a single SQL statement. If you try to execute
      more than one statement with it, it will raise a :exc:`ProgrammingError`. Use
      :meth:`executescript` if you want to execute multiple SQL statements with one
      call.

>       If :attr:`isolation_level` is not :const:`None`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      If :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` is not :const:`None`,
```

This is an attribute of `Connection`, not `Cursor`, and so the link doesn't resolve.

Author: Ah, I was under the impression that it would magically find its way :) I'll be more explicit.

>       *sql* is an INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, or REPLACE statement,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      *sql* is an ``INSERT``, ``UPDATE``, ``DELETE``, or ``REPLACE`` statement,
```

by PEP 249.
Instead of keeping a transaction open and requiring the user to use the
:meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` methods,
``sqlite3`` only implicitly opens new transactions before
:meth:`~Cursor.execute` and :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` executes any of the
following statements:

* INSERT
* UPDATE
* DELETE
* REPLACE

In addition, any pending transaction is implicitly committed in
:meth:`~Cursor.executescript`, before execution of the given SQL script.
No other implicit transaction handling is performed.

You can control which kind of ``BEGIN`` statements ``sqlite3`` implicitly
executes via the :attr:`isolation_level` connection attribute.

The ``sqlite3`` module lets the user choose bypass its transaction handling, by
setting :attr:`isolation_level` to :const:`None`.
This leaves the underlying SQLite library in autocommit mode,
but also allows the user to perform any transaction handling using explicit SQL
statements.
The SQLite library autocommit mode can be queried using the
:attr:`in_transaction` connection attribute.

.. note::

   PEP 249's autocommit concept must not be mistaken for SQLite's autocommit
   mode.

>    Though related, they are different concepts with different semantics.

Author: If we say A, we must also say B? It feels like we give the users two loose ends here: there's a PEP 249 autocommit concept, and there's an SQLite autocommit concept; now, go figure it out yourselves :) Is that acceptable? I neither want to repeat PEP 249 stuff here, nor the SQLite docs. A possible enhancement is to add links to the relevant sections in the respcective docs.

Reviewer: I added an explicit link to PEP 249; we could link the specific section using the syntax ``:pep:`PEP 249 <249#section-id>` ``.

IMO yes, we should also link the appropriate section in the SQLite docs here, rather than leaving the reader completely out to dry.

Author: Actually, I think we should defer adding this note until #93823 has landed. I'll remove it for now.

Controlling Transactions
------------------------

The ``sqlite3`` module does not adhere to the transaction handling recommended

> by PEP 249.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by :pep:`249`.
```

Link it.

> If the connection attribute :attr:`isolation_level` is not :const:`None`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the connection attribute :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level`
is not :const:`None`,
```

Again, `Connection` needs to be specified as the class, or the link won't work.

> the following implicit transaction handling is performed:
> New transactions are implicitly opened before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
new transactions are implicitly opened before
```

The above phrase adds verbosity, complexity and confusion from the multiple levels of colons without really adding anything to meaning

> :meth:`~Cursor.execute` and :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` executes any of the
> following statements:
> 
> * INSERT
> * UPDATE
> * DELETE
> * REPLACE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:meth:`~Cursor.execute` or :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` executes
INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE or REPLACE statements.
```

IMO, the relatively small benefit of making these relatively few and short terms a bulleted list does not outweigh the complexity, verbosity and indirectness cost of doing so. Therefore, I suggest a simpler and more direct prose approach.

Also, fix conjunction/plural agreement.

Reviewer 2: I'd also put all these (INSERT, UPDATE, DELETE, REPLACE) in double-backticks, personally.

> In addition, any pending transaction is implicitly committed in
> :meth:`~Cursor.executescript`, before execution of the given SQL script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :meth:`~Cursor.executescript` method implicitly commits
any pending transaction before execution of the given SQL script.
```

Avoid potentially confusing "additionally", since the statements here are parallel to, not additive to the statements about the other two methods in the previous paragraph. Also, state the method it applies to out front so the distinction between the two paras is clearer, and this construction is a bit shorter, simpler, more direct and easier to understand, and avoids an extra comma.

Author: This is a good catch. The "in addition" would definitely add confusion.

No other implicit transaction handling is performed.

> Use the :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` methods
```

Plural agreement

to respectively commit and roll back pending transactions.

You can control which kind of ``BEGIN`` statements ``sqlite3`` implicitly

> executes via the :attr:`isolation_level` connection attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
executes via the :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` attribute.
```

Fix broken link

The ``sqlite3`` module lets the user bypass its transaction handling by

> setting :attr:`isolation_level` to :const:`None`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
setting :attr:`Connection.isolation_level` to :const:`None`.
```

This leaves the underlying SQLite library in autocommit mode,

> but also allows the user to perform any transaction handling using explicit SQL
> statements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but also allows the user to perform their own transaction handling
using explicit SQL statements.
```

Clearer and more appropriate verbiage

The underlying SQLite library autocommit mode can be queried using the

> :attr:`in_transaction` connection attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:attr:`Connection.in_transaction` attribute.
```

Fix link

.. note::

>    PEP 249's autocommit concept must not be mistaken for SQLite's autocommit
>    mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :pep:`249`'s autocommit concept must not be mistaken for
   SQLite's autocommit mode.
```

Add PEP link

Controlling Transactions
------------------------

The ``sqlite3`` module does not adhere to the transaction handling recommended
by :pep:`249`.

If the connection attribute :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level`
is not :const:`None`,
new transactions are implicitly opened before
:meth:`~Cursor.execute` and :meth:`~Cursor.executemany` executes
``INSERT``, ``UPDATE``, ``DELETE``, or ``REPLACE`` statements.
Use the :meth:`~Connection.commit` and :meth:`~Connection.rollback` methods
to respectively commit and roll back pending transactions.

> You can chose the underlying SQLite `transaction behaviour`_,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can choose the underlying SQLite `transaction behaviour`_,
```

> You can choose the underlying SQLite `transaction behaviour`_,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can choose the underlying `SQLite transaction behaviour`_ —
```

As above, "SQLite" is an inherent part of the target name here. Also, avoid a comma splice and set this off with an em dash parenthetical.

> that is the kind of ``BEGIN`` statements ``sqlite3`` implicitly executes,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that is, whether and what type of ``BEGIN`` statements
the :mod:`sqlite3` module implicitly executes —
```

Be more clear that it not only controls the type of `BEGIN` statement, but whether they are executed at all or the underlying `autocommit` mode is relied upon, as well as that we are referring to the `sqlite3` _Python module_ rather than the underlying SQLite database backend.

Author: +1

But I'll remove the unneeded "self reference"; no need to link to the sqlite3 docs when you're already there.

Reviewer: Its more for conceptual disambiguity of what's being referring to and formatting consistency of the rendered output than the need for the reference, but its not a big deal.

via the :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` attribute.

If :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level` is set to :const:`None`,
no transactions are implicitly opened at all.
This leaves the underlying SQLite library in `autocommit mode`_,
but also allows the user to perform their own transaction handling
using explicit SQL statements.
The underlying SQLite library autocommit mode can be queried using the
:attr:`~Connection.in_transaction` attribute.

The :meth:`~Cursor.executescript` method implicitly commits
any pending transaction before execution of the given SQL script,

> regardless of the value of :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
regardless of the value of :attr:`~Connection.isolation_level`.
```

Editing typo

.. versionchanged:: 3.6
   :mod:`sqlite3` used to implicitly commit an open transaction before DDL
   statements.  This is no longer the case.

.. _autocommit mode: https://www.sqlite.org/lang_transaction.html#implicit_versus_explicit_transactions

> .. _transaction behaviour: https://www.sqlite.org/lang_transaction.html#deferred_immediate_and_exclusive_transactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. _SQLite transaction behaviour: https://www.sqlite.org/lang_transaction.html#deferred_immediate_and_exclusive_transactions
```

As above
